CL-CAD

Burdukov Denis

2009-08-27

Introduction

1.1 What is CL-CAD?

CL-CAD is a CAD program.

1.2 Who is Denis Burdukov

Burdukov Denis is the author of CL-CAD.

1.3 How to contact?

To contact the author (Burdukov Denis) use the following email address
litetabs@rambler.ru

If you have any ideas, thoughts or just want to chat don't hesitate
to send me a email. I will be more than happy to read it! 

Basic Concepts of CL-CAD

The full desktop of oCADis is made by 4 different types of window.
First you have the menu window. This is the window you see when you
start CL-CAD for the first time. It is also the main window. If you
close this window, you will exit CL-CAD. In this window is the main
menu.

Then there are the coordinate window. This can be activated by selecting
/View/Show Coordinates. It is used to read and continuely updates
the coordinates of the mouse. It also display the current tool.

Under that menu item there is a menuitem called Show Command. By selecting
that one a command window will be opened. This is one of the more
important things in CL-CAD. In this you be able to view what options
you have for different commands. You can also type in coordinates,
commands and other useful information in this window.

The last window is activated by selecting /File/New. A window with
a lot of things in it is shown. This is called the drawing window
and it is in this the drawing you make is shown. The buttons and popupmenus
from left to right:

Save: This is a shortcut for the menuitem called Save. It is use to
save the drawing quick and easy.

Snap: When this button is activated the snap mode is turned on.

Grid: When this button is activated the grid mode is turned on.

Ortho: When this button is activated the ortho mode is turned on.

Layer: This popmenu shows you the current layer. You can select the
current layer by select another layer on the popmenu.

Colour: In this popmenu you select the current colour for the object.
The menuitem named 'By Layer' means that the objects drawn should
use the same colour as the current layer. Item 'Userdefined' displays
a colour selection dialog where you can specify a colour.

Linetype: This is the current linetype the object will be using. The
item 'By Layer' means that the objects should be using the linetype
of the current layer.

Linewidth: This is the current linewidth the object will be using.
The item 'By Layer' means that the objects should be using the linewidth
set by the current layer. To activate a new linewidth you need to
unfocus the combobox. This is easiest done by pressing Tab.

Coordinate System

CL-CAD uses the Cartesian coordinate system for specifying points in
a drawing. When you create a two-dimensional drawing, you can enter
points for a geometry creation with either the mouse or the keyboard.

The origo of a new drawing is at the top-left corner of the window.
This can of course be changed by zoom or panning the drawing.

CL-CAD uses no particulary unit , like mm or inch, when entering a
coordinate. Instead the user decides what kind of unit he is drawing
in. 1 unit can be 1 meter, 1 kilometer or 1 light year. It doesn't
matter. Therefor you can say that the scale you are drawing in is
always 1:1.

3.1 Absolute coordinates

To enter a coordinate with the keyboard, you speficy first the X value
and then the Y value. The values are seperated by a comma. If you
want to place a point at the coordinates X=100 and Y=100, you type
"100,100".

Another way to specify this point would be to read the coordinate window
and move the cursor to the right position and press left button. This
is, however, not recommended because it can be vary hard to find the
right position.

3.2 Relative coordinates

Relative coordinates are used to locate ``to points'' in relation to
the previous point rather than the origin. You enter relative coordinates
in a manner similar to the way you enter absolute coordinates. When
you enter relative coordinates, the @ must precede your entry. For
example, if the last point specified was 6,4, then entering "@4,3"
is equivalent to specifying the absolute coordinates 6+4 and 4+3,
or "10,7".

3.3 Polar relative coordinates

A third variant is to use something that is called polar relative coordinates.
This works similar to relative coordinates but instead of using cartesian
system you use polar system. When you enter polar relative coordinates,
the @ must precede your entry, as in relative coordinate, but instead
of using a comma to separate the two X and Y you use a "<". The first
number is the radius from the last point and the second number is
the angle. For example, if the last point specified was 6,4, then
entering "@25<90'' is equivalent to speifying the absolute coordinates
6+25*cos(DEGtoRAD(90)) and 4+25*sin(DEGtoRAD(90)), or "6,29".

View 

Grid, Snap and Ortho

To increase speed and efficienty when laying out the drawing, oCADis
provides a variety of drawings aids: Grid, Snap and Ortho. These can
be selected and changed through the Drawing Aids dialog box. This
dialog can be found under /Assist/Drawing Aids. It is also possible
to enter GRID, SNAP or ORTHO directly att the Command Prompt. Futhermore
these settings can be turn on and off using the icons found in the
drawing window.

5.1 Grid

This command turns on a pattern of dots on the drawing window. These
dots are only for visual reference and are not considered part of
the drawing. Using a grid does not ensure accurate point selection,
but instead enables you to estimate distances quickly. For you to
accurately pick a grid point, the grid must be used with SNAP.

The distance between the grid dots is set by the snap distance. You
are however allowed to set the spacing between dots. For example if
the X spacing is 1 and the Y spacing is 2 the resulting grid pattern
will have one dot per X snap spacing and one dot per two times the
Y snap spacing.

5.2 Snap

When SNAP is invoked, the cursor moves only in specific increments.
For example, if the snap distance is set to 10, you could easily draw
a line that is 30 units longs. You do this by picking a point on-screen
and moving the crosshair three snap distance, and then pick another
point.

It is possible to set different values for the horizontal and vertical
snaping.

The normal pattern for snap is horizontal rows and vertical columns.
Sometimes it would be beneficial to align the snap and grid to an
angle other than the horizontal and vertical. The base point is the
pivot about which the snap is rotated. The angle for rotation may
range from 0 to 90 or 0 to -90 degrees.

5.3 Ortho

With ortho mode, you can draw lines that are perpendicular or parallell
to one another. The advantage of using the ortho mode when drawing
rectangular shape is that all corners are guaranteed to be square.

Object Snaps

When you attempt to pick points on-screen, you may have difficulty
locating an exact position. Typing the point coordinates is one method,
but in most cases you do not have such complete information that you
can type the point. Another way is using the snap function. A third
way is to use something that is called object snap, or osnap, function.

The term object snap refers to a function in which the cursor is forced
to snap exactly to specific point or location of an existing object.

CL-CAD has 10 different object snap modes. Each object snap can be
abbreviated to its first three letters. These three letters are the
only letters you need to enter to access to the corresponding object
snap mode.

6.1 ENDpoint

This is used to snap to the endpoint of a line, arc, ellipical arc,
spline or a polyline. Both the spline and the polyline must be opened.

6.2 MIDpoint

This mode finds the midpoint of a line, arc or ellipical arc. You do
not need to pick anywhere near the midpoint of the arc or line to
snap to the midpoint.

6.3 CENter

The center option enables you to snap to the center of an arc, ellipical
arc, circle or ellipse. To select the center point, you must select
the object and not the center of the object.

6.4 NODe

This option enables you to snap to points or the inserted nodes in
a block.

6.5 QUAdrant

Using the quadrant mode, you can find the 0, 90, 180 and 270 degrees
positions of a circle, arc, ellipical arc or ellipse.

6.6 INTersection

The intersection object snap mode snaps to the point where objects
cross each other.

6.7 INSertion

This mode enables you to quickly find the insertion point of a text
or a block.

6.8 PERpendicular

This is used to find a point that are perpendicular to the selected
object.

6.9 TANgent

This is used to find a point on a object that forms a tangent between
the object and another point.

6.10 NEArest

The nearest object snap mode snaps to a point on a object that is nearest
the center of the cursor.

Objects

With CL-CAD it is possible to draw and modify 11 different types of
objects. The following sections will describe the objects.

7.1 Line

This is a line that goes from one point to another. You begin by selecting
a start point and after that a end point. CL-CAD will continue to
ask for a end point until you press enter or press the right button
of the mouse. Each line you create is in CL-CAD treated as a object
of its own. You may instead of pressing enter och right button, select
the command Close. CL-CAD will then add a line from the last end point
to the start point of the first drawn line.

7.2 Polyline

Polyline is used to draw a continues set of lines and/or arcs.

7.3 Guideline

There are two types of guidelines. Since guidelines have infinite length
they will not affect commands like Zoom All but you are able to use
relevant object snaps (e.g. intersection).

7.3.1 Ray line

The first type of guideline is called ray. It is a infinite line with
one termination point.

7.3.2 Construction Line

The second type is called construction lines. This is a line of infinite
length that can be used to aid in constructing the drawing. 

7.4 Spline

7.5 Arc

An arc is a partial circle. CL-CAD gives you 11 methods for drawing
an arc.

3 Points: Speficy 3 points that the arc goes through. The arc starts
at the first point, goes through the second and ends in the third
point.

Start,Center,End: Speficy the start point, the center point and the
end point of the arc.

Start,Center,Angle: Speficy the start point and the center point. Angle
is the angle formed between the two radius lines extending from the
center point through the endpoint of the arc.

Start,Center,Length: Speficy the start point and the center point.
Length refers to the chord length.

Start,End,Angle: Specify the start and end point of the arc. Angle
refers to the angle the arc occupies.

Start,End,Radius: Specify the start point, the end point and the radius
of the arc.

Start,End,Direction: Direction refers to the direction of rotation
in degrees of the arc.

Center,Start,End: This is a variation of the Start, Center, End-option.

Center,Start,Angle: This is a variation of the Start, Center, Angle-option.

Center,Start,Length: This is a variation of the Start, Center, Length-option.

Continue: This is used when you wish to continue from the last drawn
arc or line. The start point and the direction is taken from the endpoint
and direction of the previous arc or line.

7.6 Circle

Circles are as much a part of a typical drawing as lines are. There
are 6 different ways to draw a circle

Center,Radius: First specify the center point of the circle and then
the radius.

Center,Diameter: First specify the center point of the circle and then
the diameter.

2 Points: Specify two points that define the diameter of circle.

3 Points: Specify three points on the circumference of the circle.

Tangent,Tangent,Radius: This is not currently supported by CL-CAD.

Donut: Donut is a partial solid circle (it is actually a normal circle
with a linewidth which correponse to the inner and outer diameter
of the donut). You can specify the inner and outer diameter. The outer
diameter must be greater than the inner diameter. If inner diameter
is set to 0 a solid circle will be created.

7.7 Ellipse

An ellipse consists of a center point, major axis and a minor axis.
The ellipse command provides several methods for creating an ellipse
based of these three characteristics.

7.8 Polygon

With this command you can draw regular multisided polygons. A polygon
is created as a closed polyline.

7.9 Rectangle

This command makes it easy to draw rectangles. To draw a rectangle,
specify the first corner and then the opposite corner.

The rectangle is not really a object of itself. It is translated to
a closed polyline.

7.10 Point

7.11 Text

At the moment CL-CAD only supports one kind of font and that is CL-CAD
internal. In the future, other types of fonts will be added, like
for example Type1.

Selection

Many of the editing commands requires you to select which objects to
affect. Therefor a understanding of how the selection of objects in
CL-CAD works is necassary to get the most out of CL-CAD.

The first prompt you usually will see when you are using some kind
of editing command is 'Select object(s):'. This means that CL-CAD
is in selection mode. Now you are able to use the commands found in
/Assist/Select that otherwise are not selectable.

A object is selected if its colour is different from the colour you
choosed for it. Normally this means that if a object has its XOR-colour,
it is selected. For example, a yellow object would be drawn in a blue
colour if it is selected and a red object would be drawn in a lightblue
colour. 

When you then execute the editing command, it affects only the highlighted
objects.

8.1 Point Mode

The selection starts in a so called point mode. That means you select
objects by move the cursor to the object and press the left button
of the mouse. It is also possible to enter a coordinate. 

CL-CAD will then tell you if it found a object on that position. Important
is that if you for example want to select a circle you do not click
inside the circle. Instead you click on the circumference of the circle.
Likewise for polylines and splines. Point mode works with all kind
of objects.

8.2 Window mode

If there is a lot of objects to select you better use the window mode.
This can be activated by selecting the menuitem Window under /Assist/Select
or by simple enter the command 'w'.

This allows you to draw a window and every object that are completly
within that window will be selected. This works different for different
objects.

Line,Arc,Ellipical arc: Both end points must be within the window.

Circle,Ellipse: The center point must be with in the window. 

Polyline: All nodepoints must be within the window. 

Spline: The spline itself must be inside the window. 

Text,Point: The insertation point must be inside the window. 

Ray,Construction: Cannot be selected with this method.

8.3 Crossing Mode

The crossing window also allows you to draw a window. The difference
is that a object must not be completly within the window to be selected.
You can select this command from the menu or enter 'c'.

Line,Arc,Ellipcal arc: One of the endpoints must be within the window. 

Circle,Ellipse: The center point must be within the window.

Polyline: At least one nodepoint must be inside the window.

Spline: A part of the spline must be within the window.

Text,Point: The insertation point must be inside the window.

Ray: The termination point must be inside the window.

Construction: Cannot be selected with this method.

8.4 Select All And Invert

To select all objects you may enter the command 'all' or select it
from the menu.

To invert all the objects you may enter the command 'invert' or select
it from the menu.

8.5 Remove Objects

If you have selected the wrong object you can use the command 'Remove
Object'. This will remove objects from the selection. All the normal
select modes can be used.

8.6 Done

When you are finished selecting press the right mouse button or hit
enter.

Editing 

Layers, Colours And Linestyles
